It will be important eventually to learn all of this information, but if you are drafting the "He1" text using our new method, the items marked with red type below might not be directly relevant for the purposes of writing He1. For He1, we write the text more like natural English without using brackets and without needing to mark all of the referents of the pronouns. Magenta text below is specifically for the new method to draft He1.

Summary of what needs to be done converting He1 to He2

1\. Expand pronouns including imperatives

2\. Insert subordinate clause boundaries using brackets

3\. Expand complex concepts with explications and pairings (Even for He1, it’s good to indicate these in the complex concepts section)

4\. Change implicit notation from "\<\<...\>\>" for regular implicit or "\<...\>" for necessary implicit information to notations in parentheses for clauses or underscore markings for phrases

5\. Change specialized wordings like "the LORD" to "Yahweh" and “the LORD your God” to “your(X) God named Yahweh” and “(paragraph)” to “\_paragraph”

**\-1. Meaning checklist**

\-1.1. Make sure that all the literal text is represented in some way

\-1.2. Add implicit information if needed to clarify or if helpful for understanding

\-1.3. Make sure that, as much as possible, extra (not literal or representing literal) information is marked as implicit. But be careful that you don't mark literal information or information that represents the meaning of the literal text as implicit. See the "Intro to TBTA grammar", which discusses this issue in detail.

**0\. Short checklist summary**

0.1. Do not use third person pronouns *except* for “each-other”. First and second person pronouns (like "I" and "you") and "each-other" must have the referent (person that the pronoun refers to or represents) indicated in parentheses, like "I(John) talked to Mary". (Section 3\) Using the new method for He1, it is recommended to write the first instance of a pronoun in a verse the old way (see the above red section), but after that, you can leave the pronouns,

0.2. Only use level 2 (magenta color in the ontology) words in phase 1 text in pairings, like "son/descendant". Otherwise, an **explication** should be used, like "hard hat" instead of "helmet". A level 3 word must be in a pairing or a complex alternate preceded by "(complex)". **Then there must also be a version** not using level 3 words preceded by “(simple)”. The "How to handle complex terms" document is your main reference for how to deal with complex concepts. IF YOU DO NOT KNOW THE COMPLEXITY LEVEL OF A WORD, LOOK IT UP BEFORE USING IT. (Section 1.1)

0.3. Write words that are hyphenated in the ontology hyphenated, like "John take-away Mary's food". The default verb tense is "discourse". If you want a different tense for a hyphenated word, indicate it with the underline notation, like "John take-away \_future Mary's food". (Section 1\)

0.3. **Each clause must have one and only one verb.** Subordinate clauses (but not independent clauses) are enclosed by square brackets. The total number of left brackets in a sentence must be equal to the total number of right brackets. (Section 4 and "Intro to TBTA grammar" document)

0.4. **Make sure that you do not have more than four levels of embedded brackets.** And if you have four levels of embedded brackets, try to simplify the sentence, possibly by breaking it up into more than one sentence. (Section 4\) Using the new method, try not to make the sentences too complicated. You may need to understand how the brackets work (red text  in this paragraph) in order to know if a sentence is too complex.

0.5. Make sure that event subordinate clauses and adverbial prepositional phrases (relations with a noun argument that are not in relative clauses) are placed correctly so that the sentence has the right meaning. Write "We(people) know \[Jesus died because of our(people's) \_incl bad-B actions\]", not "We(people) know \[Jesus died\] because of our(people's) \_incl bad-B actions", which would mean that we know because of our sins. 

0.6. P**ut prepositional phrases in a relative clause if they are intended to modify a noun,** like "John talked to the man \[who previously was in Bethlehem\]", instead of "John talked to the man previously in Bethlehem", which would mean that previously while he was in Bethlehem John talked to the man. (Section 5\) This is also relevant for the He1,  but you don’t need to put in the brackets.

0.7. Put a relativizer ("that", "who", "whom") at the beginning of each relative clause, like "the man \[WHO was in Bethlehem\]". **But do not put "that" at the beginning of the object complement (patient) clause of a verb**. Write "John knew \[Mary was in Bethlehem\]" instead of "John knew \[that Mary was in Bethlehem\]". (Sections 6 and 7 and “Intro to TBTA grammar”) For the He1, you may write object complement clauses so that they sound most natural.

0.8. Do not use "**when" or "where"** as a relativizer or relative pronoun in a relative clause. Instead of "The time \[when John saw Mary\] was late", write "The time \[that John saw Mary at\] was late". (Section 6\) It would be preferable to do it this way for the He1 also,  to avoid confusion with adverbial clauses.

0.9. Do not use repeated nouns in object complement (patient) clauses if they sound unnatural in English, and normally in those cases put the noun that might be repeated in the patient clause. For instance, **write "John helped \[Mary to find food\]" i**nstead of "John helped Mary \[Mary to find food\]" or "John helped Mary \[to find food\]". (For a more accurate description of this rule, see Section 7.) For the He1, you may write it so that it sounds natural.

0.10. If a noun has been referred to previously, normally use "that" instead of "the" as a determiner referring to it again. (Section 3.1)

0.11. Mark implicit information, with a notation in parentheses for clauses, and notation with an underscore for the phrase containing the word preceding the underscore notation. ***But do not make a head of a structure implicit if modifying elements are not implicit.*** That is, don't write "the person \_implicit \[who was in that house\]" if "person" is implicit, but "in that house" is not. (Section 9, "Summary of specialized notation", and especially the "Intro to TBTA grammar") For He1, use “\<\<...\>\>”  to mark regular implicit information, and “\<...\>”  to mark necessary implicit information.

0.12. Normally precede a quotation with the person speaking and a verb like "say" or "ask". If the subject "X" is implicit and the verb "say" is implicit, write "X \_implicitNecessary said \_implicitNecessary, \["..." (Or enclose in “\<...\>” using the new method.) However, it  is permissible to start a sentence with a quotation if there was preceding wording that indicated that a quotation was coming. For instance, “X  said the following words. \_verseBoundary “quotation””.

0.13. I**f you use a passive, include the agent with "by", like "John was hit by a soldier"** or "John was hit by a soldier \_implicitActiveAgent" (“\<\<by a soldier\>\>” in He1) if the agent (subject) of the sentence is implicit information. (Section 9 and "Summary of specialized notation")

0.14. Use rhetorical questions preceded by "(rhetorical)", "(yesrhetorical)" or "(norhetorical)", but follow them with a statement version preceded by "(statement)". (Section 9 and "Summary of specialized notation")

0.15. Use the perfect tense, like "John has gone", only if it would be satisfactory to substitute the simple past tense with either of "recently" or "previously", that is, "John recently went" or "John previously went". (Section 18\)

0.16. **Do not use "even" or "any" or "own" s**uch as in "John's own house". (Section 17\)

0.17. **Use "all of" rather than "all"** unless the modified noun is generic, like "**all of those people"** rather than "all those people". But “God loves all people” where “people” is generic. (Section 19\)

0.18. Make sure that imperatives (commands) are written with the agent (subject) indicated, and with the notation "(imp)", like this: "You(John) (imp) go to the town". That will be generated in English as just "Go to the town". But for He1, you may write it the way that the English is generated. (Section 15\)

0.19 Do not treat “begin” or “start”, “stop”, “finish”, or “continue to” when used in front of another verb as a separate verb. Those trigger features on the following verb (Section 21). So write “John started talking to Mary”, NOT “XJohn started \[talking to Mary\]X”. (“X” here indicates a mistake.)

0.20 Make sure that modifiers (adjectives and relative clauses) that are meant to modify multiple elements of coordinate noun phrases are written for each noun phrase or use “ \_coordinate” notation (see Section 22).

0.21 Make sure that you do not have isolated noun phrases that have no valid function in the sentence. For instance, you can't start a sentence with *"The next day"*. It would have to be "**On the next day**", in which the noun occurs with a relation. Nouns either have to be an argument of a verb, or used with a relation.

0.22 Watch out for "and" in front of a clause that looks like a subordinate clause. You only use "and" at the front of a subordinate clause if it is the final clause of the same type as a preceding subordinate clause/clauses. For instance, you can say "The man \[who was in the house\] \[and who knew Mary\] left". Note that "and who knew Mary" is a second subordinate clause of the same type (relative clause) as the preceding subordinate clause, "who was in the house". But this construction is not allowed: "The army came to Jerusalem \[and defeated the Jews\]". Here, "and defeated the Jews" is a separate independent clause. You have to write it like "The army came to Jerusalem. And the army defeated the Jews." (But no brackets for He1.)

0.23 English often uses “of” meaning “named”. *Don’t write “nation of Israel”*, **write “nation named Israel”**, and similarly for other such constructions.

0.24 Do not use “can”. In most  cases, that becomes “is able \[to…” See section 2.1.  (But no brackets for He1.)

0.25  Watch out for “to”. “To” should not be at the beginning of an event (adverbial) subordinate clause. (It does appear in some patient clauses, like “John wants \[to meet Mary\]”, but in that case, the verb (here “want”) has to take a clause argument with the agent of the subordinate clause the same as the agent of the main clause). In many cases, people write “to” where they mean “in-order-to” (see section 8). Also, there is no “to”  relation, so you only use “to”  in a prepositional phrase if the verb has a destination argument (see the Introduction to TBTA grammar).(But no brackets for He1.)

0.26 Don’t write hyphenated words inflected. Don’t write “John stood-up”; write “John stand-up”. See section 1\.

0.27 As a general rule, verbs only have one direct object (noun argument not preceded by a word like “to” or “with”). So write “John gave a gift to Mary”, not “John gave Mary a gift”.

0.28 Don’t use “going to” to express a future tense.  Use “will”. So “John will see Mary”  rather than “John is going to see Mary”.

0.29 Don’t use double negatives. Instead of saying (in natural English) “No person does not love his mother”, say “All people love their mothers.”

0.30  If there are complex words represented by a pairing or explication, make sure that the sentence makes sense  with the simple words or complex words. You don’t know what complex words will be available in the target language.

0.31 We do not allow participles (or gerunds), like “Teaching is fun”. You would have to word it differently, like "\[A person teaches people \_implicit\] is-V fun". (Or for He1, “It is fun that a person teaches \<\<people\>\>.” No brackets for He1.)

0.32 Previously, we have not allowed use of the adverb "only". But we are now adding an adverbial sense "only-A" for exclusivity. That means for only doing some things and not doing other things. Note that the adjective "only" has three senses, identity, exclusivity, low esteem, and modification of numbers. The new adverbial sense will be like the adjective sense "only-B". So, now you will be able to say "John only prayed in the temple," but you will not be able to say "Those leaders \[who should help all of the people\] of the government only helped a few people" (low esteem, but you could say "Those leaders helped only-B a few people" using the adjective).

0.33 Avoid using a negative polarity (“not”) for a verb in combination with causal event clauses such as a “because”, “so-A” or “so-C”. The meaning of that construction can be ambiguous. Consider these two types of statements: 1\. “The office did not hire Jane because Jane is the boss's daughter,” with the intended meaning: “The  reason  that the office hired Jane was  not that Jane is the boss's daughter”. 2\. “Because Jane is the boss's daughter, the office did not hire her” with the meaning that she was not hired because of a potential conflict of interest. These meanings are very different. Part of the way that we understand the meaning is the word order (which I wrote differently here), but in our system the word order in the target language would be the same for both of these constructions.

There are a couple of situations in which you can go ahead and use this kind of construction. If the context makes the meaning clear, you can use it. Consider "even though that friend won't get up to give something to you because you are his friend." Normally because a person is a friend, he would be willing to do good things for you. So the natural interpretation of this is "he's not {going to get up to give you something because he is your friend}". That is, he's not going to get up even though he is your friend. It wouldn't make sense to interpret it as "he's not going to get up to give you something {because he is your friend}". Friends don't refuse to get up and help you. In other cases, even when there's some ambiguity, if it's just too awkward to do it any other way, you can also use this construction. But try to avoid cases that are ambiguous.

 See item 27 below.

0.34 Avoid vague references to previous sentences like “did that action//thing”. **Note that “//” Indicates an option when you could use either word.** Try to be more concrete in describing what actually happened. (This is a general rule, but sometimes it’s necessary.)

0.35 There should not be two direct objects for a verb. If you read "John gave Mary the present", you understand that he's giving the present to Mary, but the computer program wouldn't understand that difference. Write "John gave the present to Mary".

0.36 Write nouns the same way at different places in the same sentence. Write “Paul gave letters to those men \[so that those men would read LETTERS\]”, not “Paul gave letters to those men \[so that those men would read THOSE LETTERS”. See item 3, where the reason for this is explained. (This is not as important for He1 \- in some cases you may use pronouns; no brackets for He1.)

0.37 Do not use a passive construction if it would not be acceptable to convert it to an active form. For instance, “John went to Bethlehem \[in order to be seen by the Pharisees\]” is not OK, because if might be converted to  “John went to Bethlehem \[in order to the Pharisees see John\]”, and in this form, the agent of the "in order to" clause is not the same as the agent of the main clause, which is required for "in-order-to". **Actually in the semantic representation, “Pharisees” is the semantic agent, even when the sentence is written in the passive form.** See section 24\.

0.38 English uses “in prison//court”, but that’s particular to English. Use “in a//the//that prison//court”. 

0.39: English often uses “when” when “after” is the real meaning. For an adverbial clause with “when”  in English, change “when” to “after” if the meaning is that the action of the main clause clearly happened after the action of the adverbial clause. Use “\[After John saw Jesus\]  John was happy” because his being happy was the result of (coming after) seeing Jesus.

0.40 Apposition is when you put a second noun after the first, like "Yahweh, your(people's) God". It represents a different way of saying the same thing. It's different from a noun noun relation, like "army hat" \= "hat of army", where “of” often represents what we call the “generic genitive”. Apposition is not allowed except for addressees. You can say "Lord, my(David's) God, you(God) are great". But you cannot say "The Lord, my(David's) God, is great", where the nouns are the agent.

0.41 Use "which X" to indicate an interrogative argument, like “Which thing did you take?” "What" becomes "which thing-A", but unless you want “thing-A”,  you should use "which thing" and indicate the sense of "thing". ( We recently added the option to use “which”  in sentences that are not questions like this: “John did not know \[which house Mary was living in\].” or  “John did not know which house Mary was living in.” in He1.

0.42 Commas are needed to separate an addressee from the rest of the sentence, after a construction like "X said" followed by a direct quote, and in coordinate noun phrases, "apples, oranges, and berries". Elsewhere you can add them if you want, but they don't do anything.

0.43  Avoid using “let” or “allow” with a subordinate clause having “God//Yahweh//Lord”  as the agent. Even if it is a passive that sounds natural in English, remember that not all languages have the passive and it may be converted to an active form. In that case, I don’t think it’s appropriate to be letting or allowing God do anything. So I advise against a sentence like “XYou(Moses)  (imp) do not allow \[the people to be destroyed by Yahweh \_implicitActiveAgent\].” (“XDo not allow the people to be destroyed \<\<by Yahweh\>\>.” in He1.) where “X” indicates an error. If converted to active form, that would be  generated as “XDo not allow Yahweh to destroy the people.”

0.44 Be cognizant of the meanings of the words in our system, which have particular meanings. Don’t use a word to represent a sense that we don’t have.

0.45  We do not have a sense of “make” meaning to make something have the characteristic of an adjective. In other words, you can’t say “X made Y good”, for instance. You have to say “X caused \[Y to be good\]”. (Or “X caused Y  to be good” in He1.)

0.47 We don't currently allow the construction "both Paul and Timothy" (both A AND B). "Both" is always used with a dual noun, like "both men \_dual".

0.48 Only a verb with a patient noun can be written in a passive form. In that case, the patient becomes the agent of the passive sentence.

0.49 Use “obey” or “obey/submit” for obeying the law or other instructions, not “follow-B”,  which we reserve for following people.

0.50 Use “give” for offering sacrifices, not our “offer”, which means to ask someone if he wants something.

0.51 Avoid using imperatives with epistemic verbs (e.g., to know, to understand, to realize, etc.) and with emotions (like “You(people) (imp) be happy”; “Be happy” in He1). The reason is that people can’t always control these states. Use 'should' with those verbs.

0.52 Two nouns can take a noun argument, “faith in X” and “ relationship with X”.  For these nouns, it is preferable to use this  construction rather than a relative clause.

0.53 For indented poetry, start a section with "(begin-poetry)", and end it with "(end-poetry)". If sections of poetry are separated by a blank line in the NIV, put "(blank-line)" at that location. This does not apply to "block quotations", large quotations that the NIV indicates with indentation, if they are not poetry. Just use quote marks to indicate such a quotation.

0.54 For "for a SHORT time" or "for a LONG time" (if you can’t use units, like “for many years), use “for a time-short-units” or “for a time-long-units” where “units” is a unit of time like minutes or years or days. If the language does not allow a short or long time, it will change to “for  a few  units” or “for many units”, using the particular type of unit chosen. For instance, keep in mind that “for a time-long-years”  may end up getting generated like “for many years” in some target languages.

**1\. Words.** Make sure that all words are simple (level 0 or 1). Exceptions are complex words that appear in pairings, like “Y” in “X/Y”, and level 3 words that appear in complex alternates (see the “Summary of specialized notation” document for complex alternate notation). If you have doubts about a particular word, look it up in the ontology and/or “How to”\! (We do write the complex words in the “pseudo-English” or “English back translation”, but not in the phase 1.) Note that any word in the “How-to” document with the entry “Yes” in the right column can be used as a complex word, regardless of whether it is currently in the ontology or not. The “How-to” document is a record of what will be implemented, not necessarily what is already implemented. (For the He1, you may use a level 2 word without a pairing. If not intended to be used in a pairing, still use level 3 words only in a complex alternate.)

From time to time, you will want to add a new word. With a few exceptions, we allow using any word in the Longman Defining Vocabulary (LDV). As an example of a word we are not using, we don’t use "really". We use "actually" or "truly" instead. 

If you think that a word should be available and you want to use it, indicate that with " \_inLDV" following the word. 

Anything following and connecting to " \_" is a comment to P2 (the person who is converting the phase 1 to the computer-internal phase 2). 

Make sure there's a space between the preceding word and "\_". *The person who is checking your work can help to decide if a new word is really needed.* 

Any complex word can be added to the vocabulary if it is used at least 20 times in the Bible and it can be easily paired with a simple word or expressed with a straightforward explication. *Newly introduced words should have an entry in the “How to” document that describes how to handle complex terms.*

With a few exceptions, like "in order to", words that are hyphenated in the ontology need to be hyphenated in the phase 1\. For instance, in order to say "John stood up", write it as "John stand-up". *Don’t write hyphenated words inflected. Don’t write “John stood-up.”* 

Normally there are clues about the time value from the way that you write the verb. For instance, TBTA knows that when you use "went" instead of "go", *the time value will normally be interpreted as discourse*. And it knows that if you write "John and Mary go", that you want the present tense. But when you write "stand-up", TBTA uses the default time value. The default time value (or tense) is discourse. Discourse is expressed in English with the past tense, but might be expressed as the present tense or something else in another language. *If you write a hyphenated verb and want the present tense, indicate that with "stand-up \_present"*. 

Unless a word is the first word in a sentence or the first word in a quoted sentence, do not capitalize words that are not capitalized in the ontology. For instance, write "king" rather than "King".

**1.1 Word semantic complexity levels.** Each word in the ontology has a semantic complexity level. 

You can tell the semantic complexity level in TBTA by the color in the "Senses" column in the ontology (menu item "Ontology and Lexicon/Ontology" in TBTA) or by right clicking in the ontology on the row with the word and selecting “Edit this concept’s semantic complexity level” \- or from the color around a notation “L\#” ( where “\#”  is the level of the word) in the online ontology app. 

Blue color is for semantic complexity level 0\. Those words are supposed to be available in every language. 

Cream color (same as the surrounding color) indicates semantic complexity level 1\. Those are simple words based primarily on the Longman Defining Vocabulary (LDV), though sometimes we make other words simple. Those words can be used in the phase 1 (along with level 4 \- see below). 

Magenta color indicates a complex word of semantic complexity level 2\. Those cannot appear in the phase 1 text except in pairings with simple words, like "son/descendant". Otherwise they would need to be in explications (see explications in the "How to handle complex terms" document). For He1, you can use level 2 words, although if you want an explication, it would be better to use that. You could also explicitly write a pairing, although you don’t need to.

We have a special simple word “null” or “NULL” that is only used in pairings. If you write “null/X”,  where X is a complex word, X will be used if it is available in the target language, and there will be nothing generated otherwise. If null/X is the head of the phrase, and X  is not generated, neither will any modifying elements such as articles, prepositions and relative clauses. Use this construction when it would not be acceptable to substitute a simple word. An example is “friends/brothers-D \<\<and null/sisters-D\>\>, where we don’t want “and sisters” added if the first noun becomes “friends”. (Notation about word sentences is indicated in item 2  below.)

Dark green color indicates semantic complexity level 3\. These are words for which it often is preferable to use an alternate sentence. Like level 2 words, level 3 words can be used in a complex pairing, "great/glorious", and in some cases they can have an explication. 

The other option is that you write a complex alternate using the level 3 word, followed by a simple alternate using simple (level 0 and level 1\) words, like "(complex) Mary had faith in God. (simple) Mary trusted in God." 

Brown color indicates semantic complexity level 4\. Level 4 words are never explicated. Most of these words are "proper nouns" or "names". There are also a few “ key terms” like “kinsmen-redeemer”. You can use these in the phase 1\.

**2\. Word senses.** Many words in our ontology have multiple senses, like “thing”, which has four senses. While not absolutely necessary, *it can sometimes be helpful to mark the sense that you want. Otherwise P2 will make the decision.* For instance, in “Yahweh sees all things”, you might want “things” to be events rather than objects. It would be helpful to indicate that to P2 by writing “things-B”. 

Currently TBTA chooses the sense of a word with the lowest letter that has an argument structure consistent with your sentence. For instance, if you write “John knows the law”, TBTA will by default choose “know-A”, to be familiar with are acquainted with something. If you intend to use “know-C”, to know a bit of knowledge (like to know the content of that law), it would be helpful to mark it that way with “John knows-C the law”. 

But in some cases, TBTA can figure out the right sense based on how you write the sentence. For instance, if you write “John knows about the law”, TBTA will automatically use “know-D”, which means to know **about** something. Similarly, senses of “know” the do not have a clause argument cannot be automatically used if the phase 1 has a clause argument.

**Do not indicate senses with the hyphen notation if the computer can figure  them out automatically.** (The reviewer and checker would appreciate not having to verify that the notations are correct if they are not needed.)

**2.1. XXXCan.** We do not use "can". Instead, we use "are able \[to ...". There are two senses of "able". 

"Able-A" indicates ability to do something, 

whereas "able-B" indicates that someone is able to do something because of the circumstances. 

For instance, "John is able-B \[to eat with Mary\] \[because Mary is in the town\]" (no brackets in He1). It's not because of any particular ability that John has that he's able to eat with her. It's because of the circumstance that she is in town. If you use this circumstantial sense, it's good to mark it with "-B". P2 may be able to figure that out, but you can help to make sure it gets entered correctly by marking it. Note: We do have the conditional version of “can” with “ so that”. Instead of writing "X did a thing \[so that X would be able to \[...", write "X did a thing \[so that X COULD ...".

**3\. Pronouns.** With the exception of “each-other”, like with “each-other(people),” do not use third person pronouns like “them,” “him,” “her,” etc. All first and second person pronouns need to have the referent (person referred to) in parentheses following the pronoun. Examples are “You(people)” and “we(John).” The referent in parentheses should always be a simple word (level 0 or 1\) or a name (level 4). Don’t put a complex pairing in the parentheses. For instance, “The Pharisees said to those followers/disciples, \[“You(followers)” are stupid/foolish”\]” is OK, but you can’t use “you(disciples)” or “you(followers/disciples)”. If the referent refers to more than one person, use the first person. For instance, “The Pharisees said to Peter and John, \[“You(Peter) are stupid/foolish”\]” is OK, but you can’t use “you(Peter and John).” In He1, you may use pronouns like in normal English. On the other hand, for at least the first occurrence of a pronoun in each verse, it is better to write it as described above for the phase 1\. That way the AI  program used to convert to phase 1, will better understand the referent of the pronoun. For first person plural pronouns, **“we” and “us” and “our**,” indicate whether the plural is inclusive (including the hearer) or exclusive (not including the hearer) with “\_incl” or “\_excl.” For instance, “Peter replied to the Pharisees, \[“We(Peter) \_excl are not stupid/foolish”\].” (No brackets in He1, and you are not required to use the pairing.)

When indicating the referent of a first or second person pronoun, do not indicate the sense of a word like “you(son-C)”.  Just write “you(son)”.  If it would not be clear from the context which sense you mean, you could write “you(son) \_C”,  but in most cases P2 will be able to figure out which sense is intended.

**3.1 Use of a//the//that//this with nouns.** "A" is used in front of a (normally common) noun in order to indicate first mention. So you would say "Then a man came to Bethlehem from Jerusalem" if this is the first time that this particular man is discussed. To make it plural, use "some" as in "some men". 

After the person or thing has been initially introduced, the normal way to refer to that noun would be with "that", like in "Then that man went to the house of Mary and Martha". Because many languages do not have the definite article, which in English is "the", we prefer using "that" rather than "the" in this case. On the other hand, after several uses of "that" referring to that noun, you may switch to "the" if you want. 

In English, "that" and "this" can be almost interchangeable, and "this" might be used by preference. But we usually reserve "this" for something newly referred to or occasionally in cases for which special emphasis is needed. For instance, an example of the "newly referred to" use would be "A man came to Bethlehem. That man was tall. Then another man came to Bethlehem. This man was short." Another example would be "Several men came to Bethlehem. One of those men got a weapon. And this man killed this man(=himself)\!" “This” should also be used for something that is in sight of the speaker and listener (“This man insults/blasphemes God\!”) or referring to the current book, “this book”.

Note  that it’s not usually appropriate to use “this” or “that”  in front of a noun that is described by an adjective or restrictive relative clause. You wouldn’t say “And  John saw that man \[that Mary was with\]”,  because “that”  defines the person – a person who was already discussed \- and you can’t restrict the meaning of a noun that is already defined.

"The" is also used when the meaning of the noun is "frame inferable", that is, who or what the noun is referring to can be inferred from the context. For instance, you might say "the town" referring to the town that the people who are being discussed are in. Or you might say "the king" or "the land" or "the nation" referring to the king of that country, the land that is in context, or the nation that the people are in. In a case like this, a helpful note to P2 might be "\_frameInferable" following the word. But  after it’s been mentioned once, you would continue to use “the king”,  but the reference would be just routine rather than frame inferable. So you would not continue to add the notation “\_frameInferable” to later references to “the king”.

A generic use is one in which a particular noun does not refer to specific people or things. A generic noun will not have an article ("a" or "the") or demonstrative adjectives ("that" or "this") in front of it. An example would be "People like \[to eat\]". It's not talking about particular people, it's talking about people in general. Usually generic nouns are plural. An example of a singular generic noun is “bad-B action \= sin”, when  we are talking about sin in general, not particular sins.  Although we use articles and demonstrative adjectives in the phase 1 text, these are removed in the phase 2 and replaced by features on the noun. "A" is replaced by the "First Mention" "participant tracking" feature. The "Routine" feature means that the participant has already been referred to, like when "the" is used instead of "that" after a particular noun has been mentioned several times. In principle, nouns that can be identified based on the context, like "the king", should be marked as frame inferable. "That" preceding a noun would become "Routine" participant tracking, usually with a "proximity" feature of "Contextually Near", while "this" preceding a noun would become "Routine" participant tracking, usually with "Contextually Near with Focus" proximity.

Write nouns that mean the same thing the same way at different places in the sentence. Consider this sentence: "The council gave letters to me(Paul) \[so-that I(Paul) could show those letters to the council’s friends/brothers-D \[who be-E in-B Damascus\]\]." It is preferable to write nouns the same way at different places in the same sentence. So here it would be better to say "so that I(Paul) could show **letters** to...". Why? The reason is that we don't know the order of the words in the target language. Suppose that the order is "So that I could show those letters to the council's brothers who were in Damascus, the council gave letters to me". With this reversed order it says "those letters" before they've even been mentioned. If you write it the same way, it will be probably generated with a pronoun. So in that target language, it would become "So that I could show letters to the council's brothers who were in Damascus, the council gave them to me". In He1, you can write “The Council gave letters to me so that I could show them to the Council’s brothers  who are in Damascus.” On the other hand, you could also write “letters”  as in the phase 1 if you want. That’s how it should ultimately be represented.

 **4\. Clauses and brackets.** Check the brackets. You can identify clauses by verbs. Each clause should have one and only one verb, and every verb indicates a clause. (Don’t be fooled by auxiliary or helping verbs. In “do not go,” “do” is not a separate verb; it’s used when making a verb negative. Also, “will” in “John will go” is not a separate verb.) Every sentence should have a main clause with a subject (or agent) and a verb, and the main clause should not be surrounded by brackets. (Exceptions are answers to questions which might be a word or phrase and not a complete clause. Also don’t be confused by the first sentence in a quote. The brackets around the first sentence of a quote are different than brackets around the main clause of a sentence; the brackets around the first sentence of a quote are around the entire sentence of the quote, because that sentence is the patient clause of a verb like “say” that introduces the quote.) Aside from the main clause, every other clause (every subordinate clause) should be surrounded by brackets. 

Check that the number of left brackets is the same as the number of right brackets in each sentence. You can count them from left to right in a sentence. Just add one for every left bracket and subtract one for every right bracket. The total number has to add to zero.

We do not allow more than four embedded levels of subordinate clauses. To understand the number of embedded subordinate clauses, you have to understand the structure of the subordinate clauses, even if you don’t have to write them that way in He1. These are identified by the number of embedded sets of brackets. For instance, "John saw \[Mary was eating with the man \[who went with Mary \[in order to see Paul\]\]\]" has three levels of embedded subordinate clauses. "In order to see Paul" is embedded in the subordinate clause with "who went with Mary" which is embedded in the subordinate clause with "Mary was eating with the man" which is embedded in the main clause with "John saw". 

On the other hand, "The man \[who saw Mary\] knew \[Mary went with Paul\]" only has one level of embedded clauses, because neither of the two subordinate clauses is within the other one. Even though four levels of embedded clauses are sometimes allowed, that level of complexity is strongly discouraged. If you have four levels of embedded clauses, try to simplify, like by breaking it up into multiple sentences.

**5\. Use of relations.** Check that relations, both those with a noun argument (like “in the house”) and event clauses with a clause argument (like “\[while John was in Bethany\]”), have the correct meaning in the sentence. Aside from a few exceptions (see the discussion in the “Summary of specialized notation” document), all relations modify a verb. The only way to get a relation with a noun argument to modify a noun is to put it in a relative clause so that the whole clause modifies the noun. For instance, “The mouse in the house was small” does not mean that “the mouse that was in the house” was small. It means that the mouse was small when it was in the house, because “in the house” modifies the verb “to be.” That sentence would have the “implicature” (implied meaning) that the mouse is bigger when it is not in the house. In order to make “in the house” modify “mouse,” you have to write it like this: “The mouse \[that was in the house\] was small”.

**6\. Relative clauses.** Relative clauses have to have a relativizer (word that introduces a relative clause), “who,” “whom,” or “that.” Write “man \[who was in the house\]” instead of “man in the house”. An object of a preposition can be relativized, but the preposition has to be indicated in the relative clause. Write “reason \[that John left FOR\]” instead of “reason \[that John left\]” and “time \[that John left AT\]” rather than “time \[that John left\]”. (Here I’m using uppercase letters to emphasize a word, but you would write it with lowercase letters.) 

 We do not use "when" when introducing a relative clause. A relative clause modifies a noun. So we do not use this construction: "I(Paul) liked the time \[when I(Paul) was with you(Timothy)\]". Instead, we write "I(Paul) liked the time \[that I(Paul) was with you(Timothy) during\]", or something like that. But we can use "when" introducing an adverbial clause. An adverbial clause functions adverbially, meaning that you can think of it as modifying the verb in the sentence. So you can write: "I(Paul) was happy \[when I(Paul) was with you(Timothy)\]". In that sentence, "when I was with you" is an adverbial clause that you can think of as modifying "was happy". It answers the question "when was I happy?" A second valid use of "when" is as a question word, like in "When did you(people) see Timothy?" Concerning "where", we also do not use that to introduce a relative clause. In other words, we do not say "the place \[where I(Paul) lived\]". You would say "the place \[that I(Paul) lived at\]". "Where" cannot introduce an adverbial clause, so the ONLY use of "where" is as a question word. If you want to express the meaning of "when" or "where", that doesn't mean that you always have to introduce the word "time" or "place". Instead of "the camp \[that was the place \[that I(Yahweh) live in\]\]", you could say "the camp \[that I(Yahweh) live in\]". Instead of "Paul was happy at the time \[that Paul was with Timothy during\]", you could say "Paul was happy \[when Paul was with Timothy\]". BUT, we may use “when” and “where” introducing a relative clause IN THE ENGLISH BACK Translation. In He1, you could probably get away with using “when” and “where” in relative clauses like I said not to use them above, but it’s preferable to write them the way I described above because it makes clear the exact relations that are used (“during” versus “at” or “in”).

We don’t allow relative clauses with possessives. Instead of “the man \[whose cat was black\]”, write “the man \[who had a black cat\]”.

**Relative clauses modify nouns and are either restrictive or descriptive.** By default, relative clauses modifying a common noun (not a name, that is, not a proper noun or level 4 word) are restrictive, and relative clauses modifying a proper noun (level 4\) are descriptive. That makes sense considering that a name usually defines precisely who you are talking about. But suppose you've already mentioned a person so that that person is defined. In that case you would use "that person \[ \_descriptive who lived in Bethlehem\]", indicating that the clause should be descriptive, even though "person" is not a proper noun. And occasionally you will want to use a restrictive clause for a name, like in "the God \[ \_restrictive who hears us(people)\]" or "the James \[ \_restrictive who was the son of Alpheus\]".

**7\. Patient clauses.** If a verb has a patient proposition (clause) argument, and the agent (subject) of the proposition argument is required to be the same as either the subject or patient of the main clause, the repeated noun is deleted. Normally in this case, the patient proposition starts immediately after the verb (see the examples below). We do not need to repeat a noun for the sake of the analyzer if it sounds unnatural in English; the sentences are supposed to sound like normal English.

Examples:  
(1) sentence where the subject of the subordinate clause *is the same as the subject* of the main clause; write  
as "John wanted \[to eat food\]", not “John wanted \[John to eat  
food\]”  
(2) sentence where the subject of the subordinate clause *is the patient* of the main clause: write as  
"John wanted \[Paul to eat food\]", not “John wanted Paul \[Paul  
to eat food\]”  
(3) sentence where the subject of the subordinate clause is *not necessarily related to arguments* of the main clause; write  
as "John knew \[Paul was eating food\]". In He1, you can write “John knew that Paul was eating food.”  
(4) In all of those cases, we put the opening bracket after the verb in the main clause.  
BUT, you would write “John told Paul \[John will go to the town\]”, generated as “John told Paul that he will go to the town,” because the subject of the proposition is not NECESSARILY the same as the subject of the main clause using “tell-A”. Similarly, we would write “Mary showed John \[John was wrong\]” Because “show-B”  can have an arbitrary patient (here the first instance of “John”). In He1, you can write “John told Paul that  John will go to the town” and “Mary showed John that John was wrong”.

**Omit the complementizer “that” when writing a patient proposition argument. \*\*\*NOTE: I’m not talking here about relative clauses. You need “that//who//whom” introducing a relative clause as discussed above.** (I use the notation “A//B//C” to indicate an option where you might use A, B, or C.)\*\*\* As an example, I write “John knows \[Mary is in the town\]” rather than “John knows \[that Mary is in the town\]”.  The reason is that if you write it the second way, the TBTA analyzer will interpret “that” as a demonstrative, like “that” in “Did you(John) see THAT man?” and P2 will have to correct it. If you write the first way, it will automatically be correctly interpreted by the analyzer.

**8\. Causality.** There are a number of ways to indicate causality (something is caused by something) in TBTA. These include the verbs "cause", "make", and "force", the conjunctions "so", "then-D", "therefore" and “for”, and the relations "because" (with a noun or clause argument), "in-order-to", "so that ... would" ("so-C"), and "so that ...could" ("so-A"). In English, just "to" is often used to indicate "in order to", but you need to write "in order to" (in this case with or without the hyphens) instead. For instance, in the English sentence, "John went to Mary's house to talk to Mary", "to" actually represents our relation "in order to". An "in order to" clause always has the same subject or agent in the subordinate clause as in the main clause. For a similar structure without the same agent in the subordinate clause, consider using "so-A" or "so-C".  In He1, you could probably get away with using “to”  instead of “in order to”, but “in order to” would be preferred.

"So-B" does not indicate causality. It indicates that something happened as a consequence without the intention of the person who caused it.

**9\. Implicit information.** It’s great to include implicit information. The TND indicates these in Paratext with a light gray font and NASB indicates implicit words with italics. And I often include additional implicit information. You can use anything that’s helpful for interpretation and is most likely to be true. In our program, the translator can choose to use this extra information or not to use it. Whenever possible, implicit text should be marked as implicit. The phase that includes a word is marked as implicit by putting “ \_implicit” after the word if the word is not grammatically required in the sentence, or by putting “ \_implicitNecessary” after the word if the word is grammatically required in the sentence. In He1, “\<\<...\>\>” is used for regular implicit information, and “\<...\>”  is used for necessary implicit information. Normally a sentence requires a subject and a verb, so these would be marked as implicit with “ \_implicitNecessary”. I also sometimes mark a word as implicit necessary if the clause or sentence would not make any sense without it. (See passives later for passive agents.) But when you mark the word preceding one of those notations as implicit, you are really indicating that the phrase containing that word is implicit, so any modifiers within the phrase will also be implicit. For instance, all the material in “the man \_implicit \[who loved God\]” would be implicit, since “who loved God” modifies “the man”. Thus if “who loved God” is part of the literal text, you shouldn’t mark “man” as implicit. There are noun, verb, adjective, and adverb phrases. You can make an adjective that modifies a noun implicit without making the noun implicit, because the adjective phrase is a modifier of the noun phrase (the noun in the “head” of the adjective phrase). Similarly, you can make an adverb phrase implicit without making the verb implicit.

Clauses are marked implicit with a notation in parentheses, like “(implicit-situational)”. In He1, “\<\<...\>\>” is used for regular implicit information. This notation indicates that the implicit information can be inferred from the situation, but is not literal text. That is the most common type of indication of implicit information for a clause. Perhaps the second most commonly used notation is "(implicit-subaction)". This is used to indicate a separate event that must've happened between the other events. (There's definitely some overlap between these two types of implicit information.) For other kinds of markings, see the “Summary of specialized notation” document. Subordinate clauses can also be marked as implicit, for instance "John talked to Mary \[while John (implicit-situational) was in the town\]". We usually put the implicit notation in front of a sentence when the entire sentence is implicit. (Making the main clause of a sentence implicit means that the entire sentence is implicit.) But it will be somewhat easier for P2 if you put the implicit marking for a subordinate clause after some of the words in the clause, like above where I put "(implicit-situational)" after "while John".

**10\. Quotes.** Make sure you have the right notation for quotes. There is a discussion of this in the “Summary of” document. Quotes are always introduced with the speaker or source, like “John said,”. If the literal text doesn’t have that, you can use “John \_implicitNecessary said \_implicitNecessary”. In He1, “\<...\>”  is used for necessary implicit information. There is always an extra set of brackets around the first sentence in a quote. That’s because the first sentence of a quote is always a patient proposition argument of the verb that introduces the quotation. In a single sentence quote, this is pretty straightforward. The whole quote is the patient clause argument. An example is:

Richard said, \[“I(Richard) love you(Mary)”\].

The structure of a multi-sentence quote is exactly the same, except that the quote doesn’t end after the first sentence. An example is:

Richard said, \[“I(Richard) love you(Mary)\]. So I(Richard) want \[to hold your(Mary’s) hand\].”

For multiple paragraph quotations, we do not follow the natural English usage that would put an open quotation mark at the start of each paragraph in the quotation. We put only one quotation mark at the beginning of the entire quotation, and only one quotation mark at the end of the entire quotation.

NIV sometimes marks a quotation with indented text. We don't do that. If there is a section of indented text for which the meaning is that it is a quotation, you have to do it as a quotation like we normally do. Sometimes the TND can show you that this kind of text is a quotation.

There are certain constructions that add a single quote symbol (‘) in the generated text, like “called” and “means,” but we don’t use the single quote symbol (‘) in the phase 1\.

**11\. Titles and paragraph markings.** Currently we place titles and paragraph breaks following the placement of these in NIV. The titles do not need to be the same as those in the NIV. You are pretty free to write the titles as you like, as long as they are appropriate for the text. Indicate a title by putting “(title)” in front of it. Indicate a paragraph break in the phase 1 with “ \_paragraph”, and in the pseudo-English with “(paragraph)”.

**12\. Answers.** Only use the word “answer” when somebody answers a question. Otherwise, if someone is responding to someone else, you can use “reply”. So for instance “John said, \[“I think \[you(Paul) are bad”\]\]. Paul replied(not answered), \[“I(Paul) am not bad\!”\]”.

**13\. Passives and rhetorical questions.** We do use passives in our system, but whenever you use a passive, you have to indicate the verb using "by" with the subject or agent of the verb. For instance, "Those people will be destroyed by Yahweh \_implicitActiveAgent". (For He1, “\<\<by Yahweh\>\>”.) This is an excellent example of where a passive might be useful to avoid saying that Yahweh will be the destroyer. The Bible itself often uses passives like this. I often use a passive if it's not clear that the agent should be "God" or "the Father" when Jesus (who in at least one sense is God) is involved. Usually we encourage using a passive when the literal text has a passive, but changing to an active form can be helpful in complex constructions where using a passive can make the text difficult to understand.

We also use rhetorical questions. But whenever you have a rhetorical question (see the notation in the "Summary of specialized notation" document), *follow it by a statement version.* 

**13.1 Generic genitive.** The generic genitive expresses that there is some relation between one noun and another noun. The relationship is not well defined in our system. Examples would be "John's house", for the house that John lives in (not owns \- we have a separate relation for that) and "town of Judah", indicating a location. Or it might express some other relation, like "leader of the army". In our English grammar, the generic genitive can be expressed in a number of ways, like with the Saxon genitive, "John's house", the Norman genitive, "a town of Judah", or a pre-posed noun, "the army leader". That is a choice that is made for each combination of nouns having the generic genitive relationship. These choices are set up in the English grammar when it is defined. In the phase 1 semantic relations, I often use "of" to indicate the relationship, but keep in mind that that relationship might be generated in other ways. For instance, I could write “house of John”, but the English grammar is likely to express that as “John’s house”. Generally, when a person is the modifier (here a possessor), the Saxon genitive is used when English is generated.

**14\. Explain name and generic genitive expansion.**  Warning: this is an advanced topic, but one you will want to master. There are three specialized types of implicit information that modify nouns. These are written in the reversed way than they are intended to be generated. You write “Cana named a town \_explainName” if you want “\<\<a town named\>\> Cana”, where “\<\<a town named\>\>” is implicit information. (We use the “\<\<...\>\>” notation in the pseudo-English English back translation to indicate implicit information, and “\<...\>” to indicate necessary implicit information.) The reason that we can’t write this phrase as “a town \_implicit named Cana” is because “town” is the head noun in the phrase, so “named Cana” would also be implicit since it modifies “town”. The translator has the option to include or not include implicit text. If “the town” were removed (because the translator doesn’t want any implicit information), the entire phrase, “a town \_implicit named Cana,” would be removed, including “Cana”.  But in this situation, “Cana” is literal text. Using our notation, TBTA will reverse the order of these arguments before generation if the implicit information is included. That is, it will change “Cana named the town” to “the town named Cana”. The notation “\_explainName” is only used with the “named” relation (which is one of the few relations that takes a noun argument). We like to introduce types of nouns like places, nations, and even sometimes men or women using this notation when they are first introduced in a book of the Bible. After the first introduction of a noun in a particular book of the Bible, we don’t continue to explain the name.

 A similar construction is what we used to call metonymy. We now use the notation “\_dynamicExpansion” and “\_literalExpansion”, which are usually used with “of”. (Previously we only had the dynamic expansion option, and the notation was “\_explainMetonymy”.) An example of a dynamic expansion is “Herod of the soldiers \_dynamicExpansion searched for Jesus”. The literal text is “Herod searched for Jesus”, but if the translator wants to expand the meaning of expressions like this dynamically, he can choose to have it expressed as “\<\<The soldiers of\>\> Herod (or Herod’s soldiers) searched for Jesus”. Just like for the “\_explainName” example, we can’t write it as “The soldiers \_implicit of Herod searched for Jesus”, because “soldiers” in this construction is the head noun of the phrase “the soldiers of Herod”, so if the implicit “soldiers” were removed (because the translator doesn’t want this implicit information), the literal “Herod” would also be removed. So we write it in the reversed way, “Herod of the soldiers  \_dynamicExpansion”, and the order of the nouns will be reversed in the generated text.

An example of a literal expansion is “Yahweh of the eyes \_literalExpansion see all things-B”. In many languages, the most natural way to say this would be “Yahweh sees all things”, but in this case the literal text is “{The eyes of} Yahweh see all things”. The translator can choose to use literal expansions like these or not to use them. Note that in this case they would not be any marking of implicit information, because the extra information is literal (just not always desired).

**15\. Imperatives, suggestive let’s and jussive, and pray-hope.** 

Imperatives (commands) are written like this, “You(John) (imp) go to that town” (“Go to that town” in the He1). Note that if you want to say, “John, go to the town,” “John” needs to be written twice like this: “John, you(John) (imp) go to the town.”

Suppose you want to say “Let’s go to the town”. The way that we write that is “We(Peter) \_incl go \_suggestiveLets to the town”  and it will be generated in English as “Let’s go to the town”. (In He1, you can write it like for the generated English.)That was for a first person plural subject. Suppose on the other hand that you want to say “Let Peter go to the town”, meaning that he should do it, not that he should have permission to do it. For that we write for the phase 1 “Peter (jussive) go to the town” and it will be generated as “Let Peter go to the town”.  (In He1, you can write it like for the generated English.)

A “jussive” is a third person imperative. If rather than an imperative, if you wanted to express permission for Peter to go to the town, you would say “You(people) (imp) let \[Peter go to the town\].” (The He1 could be written the same way. You might want to add a notation like “\_jussive” in the He1 to make it clear which one you want.) These two uses of “let” are very different.

A construction similar to the jussive is if you want to say “May Peter go to the town” expressing a prayer or hope. In that case we write for the phase 1 “I(John) pray-hope \[Peter will go to the town\]” and it will be generated as “May Peter go to the town”. (For the He1, you could write “I pray-hope Peter will go to the town” or “May Peter go to the town. The first one would be more likely to be correctly interpreted by P2.)

**16\. Uses of “would”.** Natural English "would" indicates the "conditional mood". The conditional mood is a grammatical mood used in conditional sentences to express a proposition whose validity is dependent on some condition. We do not have an explicit feature associated with that. "Would" only occurs with certain relations, in particular, some of the "if" relations and "so-C". So we cannot write "John would go to Bethlehem" by itself as a complete sentence (you might want to do that following another sentence that had an “if”). "If-A" is used for conditions that might or might not happen, "if-B" is used for conditions that are unlikely but might happen, and "if-C" is used for conditions that definitely did not happen. "If-A" is currently used for future conditions, as in "\[If-A John will go to Bethlehem\] John will see Mary". (No brackets needed in He1.) The current uses of "would" are "John went to the town \[so-C that John would see Mary\]” (Or “so-that” instead of “so that”; you don’t need to add “-C”; the analyzer will know which form of “so” it is because of “would”), "\[If-B \_hypothetical John were to read that book\] Mary would read that book", and "\[If-C \_counterfactual John had read that book\] Mary would have read that book". We can’t currently use “if-A” for past events, but we might consider adding it in the future if it seems to be needed. (For He1, you don’t need the brackets, and you would put commas after the “if” clauses.)

**17\. “Even” and “any”:** We don’t use these words. So you can’t say “John even gave a valuable gift to Mary”, or “John did not give any gifts to Mary”. In both cases, you can just omit those words. “Any” is a replacement in natural English for “a” in negative statements. Sometimes you would replace a plural, “John did not eat any apples” with a singular, “John did not eat an apple”. “Even” is a way to emphasize a statement. There could be other ways to do that, like “The gift \[that John gave to Mary\] was very valuable” or “John gave  \_ emphasized a very valuable gift to Mary”, although in our English grammar, “\_emphasized” sometimes (like in this example) doesn’t do anything. Or you could even expand to "And John did another kind thing for Mary. John gave a gift to Mary." (“\_emphasized” does have an effect on the subject or the patient of a verb. “John \_ emphasized was the tallest man” is generated in English as “It was John who was the tallest man.” “Mary knew John \_emphasized” is generated in English as “It is John whom Mary knew.”)

We do, however, have “even-if” and “even-though” relations, which include the idea of “even”.

Also we don’t use “own” as in “John’s own house”. This is a form of emphasis. If you want, you can write “John’s \_emphasized house”, though currently that won’t affect the generated English.

**18\. The perfect tense.** The perfect tense is used in this sentence: "John has gone to Mary's house". The meaning of the perfect is that there is a present condition because of a past action. Here the implication is that John continues to be at Mary's house because he previously went to her house. So the action is the going, and the implied present condition is that he is there now. In our system, the perfect is represented by the feature "flashback" on the verb. The perfect is used very frequently in both Greek and English. So most English translations will also use it frequently. But the problem is that many languages that we will want to translate to do not have a perfect tense. In many of these languages, the perfect (or more accurately, flashback) will be expressed in a different way like using the simple past tense with "recently" or "previously". We only allow use of the perfect in our phase 1 semantic representations if substitution of the simple past tense with "recently" AND  with "previously" will be an adequate representation of the meaning. So you can write "John has gone to Mary's house" if "John recently went to Mary's house" and "John previously went to Mary's house" would BOTH be an adequate representation of the meaning. You would not want to say "God has chosen \[us(people) to be God's people\]" if the choosing might have occurred in the ageless past, because "recently" would not be appropriate in that case. Although it would be more wordy, so you might not want to do this all the time, in certain cases you could expand the idea of the perfect by doing something like this: "We(people) are God's people \[because God chose \[us(people) to be God's people\]\]". (No brackets for He1.)

**19\. All.** For "all", we use "all of" unless the noun is generic.  So "All people are humans", but "All of Jesus's followers were at that place. "

**20\. Colon.** Instead of a colon (“:”) use a period.

**21\. “Begin”, “start”, “stop”, and “finish”:** "Begin" or "start", like in "John began//started to talk to Mary" (where "//" indicates you could write either one) is not a separate word in the phase 2, but it signals the "inceptive" (inception or starting) aspect of the verb "talk". Similarly, "stopped ", as in "John stopped talking to Mary" signals the "cessative" (ceasing or stopping) feature of "talk". "Finished" as in "John finished talking to Mary" signals the "completive" (completed or finished) aspect of the verb "talk". So "begin", "stop", and "finish" used in these ways are not separate verbs in the semantic representations. And you write “John began talking to Mary”, NOT “XJohn began \[talking to Mary\]X”, because “began” used in front of another verb is not actually a verb in the semantic representations.

**22\. Coordinate modifiers.** “Coordinate” structures are structures of the same type that are joined, normally by “and” or “or”. For instance, "an apple, a pear, and a peach" is a coordinate noun phrase. It used to be that any modifiers that modified each one of the nouns in the coordinate noun phrase would have to be repeated. For instance, if you wanted to say "black dogs and black cats ", you would have to write it just like that. You couldn't write "black dogs and cats" meaning that both of them were black. But we now allow three different kinds of modifiers to modify all of the nouns in a coordinate noun phrase. Each of these is indicated with the notation " \_coordinate". The first of these is an adjective. You can write "black \_coordinate dogs and cats" to indicate that "black" modifies both dogs and cats. To indicate a first mention dog and a first mention cat, I recommend writing "black \_coordinate a dog and a cat", although you could also write "a black \_coordinate dog and a cat". In either case, the coordinate feature is set manually by the phase 2 person. It doesn't happen automatically. But it would be better not to write "a black \_coordinate dog and cat" (although that sounds best in English) because the analyzer won't know that "cat" is first mention. The second kind of coordinate modifier is a modifying noun in a noun-noun relation. For instance, in natural English we can say "the kings soldiers and horses", and people would understand that the horses also belong to (or are associated with) the king. For these noun modifiers, we always put the modifying noun at the end of the noun phrase. In English you can say either "the king's soldiers" using the Saxon genitive or "the soldiers of the king" using the Norman genitive. In this case, we would use the Norman genitive, and write "the soldiers and the horses of \_coordinate the king" or "the soldiers and the horses of the king \_coordinate". Again, in either case the phase 2 person will have to manually set the feature for a coordinate noun-noun relation. The third kind of coordinate modifier is a relative clause. This is the first type of coordinate modifier that we included in our system. You can write "boys and girls \[ \_coordinate \_descriptive that God loves\]" (or without brackets in He1), generated as "boys and girls, whom God loves", to indicate that both "boys" and "girls" will be modified by the relative clause. Note that in the case of the adjective, the adjective comes before the coordinate noun phrase, whereas the noun and relative clause modifiers come after the coordinate noun phrase.

23\. Our word "now" is an adverb meaning “at the present time”. We do not have "now" as a discourse marker indicating that the speaker is starting to discuss a new topic (note “now” listed as a referential discourse marker in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discourse\_marker\#:\~:text=Examples%20of%20discourse%20markers%20include,her%201987%20book%20Discourse%20Markers). Consider these sentences: 1\. "Now, let's look at the function of verbs during the next month," 2\. "Let's look at the function of verbs now." The first use is as a discourse marker. It doesn't mean at the current time. In fact, it says "during the next month". It's an indication that the speaker is moving to a new subject. We do not have that sense of "now". On the other hand, example 2 with the adverb is allowed.

24\. Do not use a passive construction if it would not be acceptable to convert it to an active form. Many languages do not have the passive, so for those languages they will automatically be converted to an active form. In other words,  you have to keep in mind that “John was hit by Paul” might be converted to “Paul hit John.” when converting from passive to active form, the subject and object of the sentence will be reversed. Consider “John knew the man \[who was hit by Paul\].” This sentence is OK because “John knew the man \[whom Paul hit\]” is also a valid phase 1 sentence. The function of “man” in the relative clause can be the agent or patient of the relative clause. (“Who” or “whom” represents “man” in the sentence.) 

Suppose the sentence has an implicit active agent in the relative clause, “John knew the man \[who was hit by Paul \_impliicitActiveAgent\]” (“\<\<by Paul\>\> in He1). If necessary (for a language that did not have the passive) TBTA could convert this to “John knew the man \[whom Paul  \_implicitNecessary hit\]”.

Now consider this incorrect sentence: “John went to Bethlehem \[in order to be seen by the Pharisees\]”. This construction using “in order to” requires that the agent of the subordinate clause be the same as the agent of the main clause. In other words John is the one who wants to be seen. But for a language that does not have the passive, this will be converted to “John went to Bethlehem \[in order to the Pharisees see John\]”. Now  the agent of the subordinate clause is not the same as the agent of the main clause,  which is required for “in order to”. 

The same thing holds for clause arguments (or patient propositions)  of verbs when the agent of the clause argument is required to be the same as the agent of the main clause. You can write “John tries \[to see Mary\]”, but not “John tries \[to be seen by Mary\]”. In a language that does not allow the passive, that would be converted to “John tries \[to Mary see John\]”,  and now the agent of the subordinate clause is not the same as the agent of the main clause. The same thing holds for a number of other verb senses like “know-how-A”, “want-B”, and “like-B”. Note that senses of these words that do not require that the agent of the subordinate clause be the same as the agent of the main clause could be written in passive form, like “know-how-B”. For example “John know-how \_present(or knows how) \[houses are built by people \_impliicitActiveAgent\]” (“John knows how houses are built \<\<by people\>\> in He1) is OK, because  with the subordinate clause changed to active form, “John know-how \_present(or knows how) \[people \_impliicitNecessary build houses\]” (“John knows how \<people\> build houses” in He1), is also OK.

25\. Sometimes a sentence says something, and then the next sentence restates the content of that first sentence. For instance, "Paul did some things. Paul cooked a meal. And Paul served that meal to John." In this case, you shouldn't start the second sentence, "Paul cooked a meal" with "And". Paul is not doing some things AND cooking a meal and serving that meal. Cooking a meal and serving the meal is a description of what "some things" means in the first sentence.

26\.  When writing alternates in phase 1,  try to use the following order:

literal rhetorical complex  
literal rhetorical simple  
literal statement complex  
literal statement simple  
dynamic rhetorical complex  
dynamic rhetorical simple  
dynamic statement complex  
dynamic statement simple

The purpose of this order is to put the most literal alternates first, and the most dynamic alternates last. Simple alternates directly follow complex alternates. (Hopefully you won’t have  all of these alternates at one time. We should try to limit the number of alternates for a single sentence to four AT THE MOST, and fewer is preferable.)

28\. English (and Greek) employ genitives that are not like the genitives that we use in TBTA. For example: “faith of Christ” could mean “faith that is in Christ” or “Christ’s faith”. That particular example is ambiguous, but perhaps we have “knowledge of the Son of God” (Eph 4:13). We know that this is not “the Son of God’s knowledge” but rather it is “knowledge that is about the Son of God”. In these situations, we should not write it as a genitive. Instead, write it in an expanded form.

29\. Coordinate nouns should have "and" or "or" in front of the last noun, and commas following all but the last noun, like “a man, a woman, and a child”. Coordinate adjectives can have "and" or "or" preceding the last adjective, like "big and strong", or they can be strung together linearly, like "a big strong soldier". The last coordinate relative clause should have "and", "or", or "but" at the beginning, like "a man \[who was very big\] \[but who was not very strong\]". Some other combinations of coordinate subordinate clauses would be joined with "and" or "or", like "\[If...\] \[if ...\] \[and//or if...\]" and "\[because...\] \[and//or because...\]", but not with "but", but there are a few other kinds of coordinate subordinate clauses that might be joined with "but". For instance, "John wanted \[to go to Bethlehem\] \[but to talk to Mary \[before John leaves\]\]".

30\. We are going to try allowing coordinate verbs, but the conditions are rather strict. The coordinate verbs (two or more) cannot have a patient or  source argument, and all oblique arguments of the multiple verbs (source, destination, instrument, beneficiary) and prepositional phrases functioning adverbially must apply to all of the verbs. So you can say "Jesus was born and grew" or "The man died and fell", but you can't say "Peter cooked and ate the food" (patient arguments) or "John ran from Paul and fell" (source argument for only one verb) or "John died and fell on the ground" (prepositional phrase only modifies the last verb). 

31\. We do not infrequently encounter the situation where we have a literal and dynamic alternate that differ only by one word choice. For He2, we are now going to have a new notation "dynamic\_word**\\**literal\_word" (note BACKslash, not forward slash) that can be used for this situation. With this notation, the single sentence will represent the combination of a literal alternate with the word following the backslash, and a dynamic alternate with the word preceding the backslash. The order of the words "dynamic\_word\\literal\_word" is chosen to be similar to how we use "simple\_word/complex\_word". The first word represents the simpler to understand or more dynamic wording, whereas the second word represents the more difficult to understand or more literal wording. But make sure that all of the features of both words agree. For example, "destroy\\swallow".

32\. Conjunctions significantly help the text to flow (be read) smoothly. Used properly they can make the text sound less choppy. In the early days our texts were criticized for being disjointed, and adding conjunctions solved that problem.  So the conjunctions are very important, and they're often best determined by looking at the whole passage altogether rather than individual sentences. So we recommend that after you've finished working on a passage, you read through it out loud, ideally several times, in order to make sure that it flows well.

The choice of conjunctions at the beginning of sentences is to some extent a matter of taste. But here are some of the principles that I use and that would be good to keep in mind. However, in most cases the following principles are guidelines, not rules. Mikayla might do it somewhat differently than I do. \[\] If a second sentence says basically the same thing as the first – it is another way of saying the same thing – don't start the second sentence with "And". In that case, it's not additional information, just a restatement. This is often, though not always, the case with the two lines of Hebrew poetry. \[\] TBTA has the capability of joining sentences if the sentences are of the same type and the second sentence starts with "And". If you have three sentences, A, B, and C, and you think it would be most appropriate that B would be combined with C, put "And" at the beginning of C, but not at the beginning of B. Otherwise A might be combined with B and there would be no possibility of combining with C. \[\] If sentence B contrasts with sentence A, use "But" instead of "And" regardless of what an English translation uses. And don't use "But" if a second sentence is not contrastive with the previous material regardless of what an English translation uses. (The TNN often gives advice about conjunctions that seem questionable. It will often say something like “in many languages, this conjunction will not be appropriate.”) \[\] Even if every sentence in an English translation starts with "And", try to break it up by having some sentences without conjunctions or by using other conjunctions like "Then". When appropriate, you may use "Then-C", which is for an immediate temporal succession. (The NIV is sometimes a good guide for conjunctions.) \[\] If "Then" represents consequence rather than temporal succession, indicate the sense with "Then-D". \[\] Often, if a second rhetorical question starts with "Or", a second statement version should start with "And". For example, "Should you steal things? OR should you kill people?" in statements should become "You should not steal things. AND you should not kill people." Think about the meaning when you are writing. You don’t want to say that it’s okay to kill people as long as you don’t steal things.

